.TH troff2page 1
.SH NAME

troff2page \- troff to HTML converter

.SH SYNOPSIS

From the shell prompt:

    troff2page <pathname>
    troff2page --help
    troff2page --version

It is not necessary to run the file troff2page as a Unix script.  You
can simply load troff2page (it is a Lisp file) into your Common Lisp,
and then call the Lisp procedure troff2page:troff2page (i.e., the
procedure named troff2page in the package troff2page) on your source
document.  E.g.,

    (load "pathname/of/troff2page")
    (troff2page:troff2page "my-troff-document.ms")

The procedure troff2page:troff2page can be called
several times, on the same or different documents, from
within the same Lisp session.

.SH DESCRIPTION

troff2page converts troff (man and ms) documents into HTML web pages.

The program troff2page takes a single argument.  Typically this is a
filename specifying the input document file.  Thus, to convert an input
troff document named jobname.ms, type

    troff2page jobname.ms

at your operating-system prompt.  This creates an output HTML file
jobname.html in the current directory.  (This HTML file has the same
basename as the input troff file (i.e., jobname), but its extension is
\&.html.)

If the input troff uses the page-break request .bp,
then the output HTML consists of a series of interlinked files: The
first file is named jobname.html; the rest are jobname-Z-H-1.html,
jobname-Z-H-2.html, etc.

If troff2page's argument is --help or --version,
troff2page displays an appropriate informative
text and exits.  For example,

    % troff2page --help
    troff2page version ...
    Copyright (C) ...
    For full details, please see http://www...

While this is intentionally similar to groff's --help and --version
options, troff2page cannot process true options as groff can.  Indeed,
if --help and --version happen to be the names of input documents,
troff2page will process them as such.

If troff2page's argument is not --help or --version and does not name a
file, troff2page exits with a "could not find file" message.

If troff2page is called with no argument, it exits with a "called with
no argument" message.

.SH SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS

The script troff2page runs on the Unix command-line on Cygwin, Linux,
Mac OS X, and Solaris.  It uses the Common Lisp implementation mentioned
in the shell environment variable LISP, which can currently be set to
either clisp, clozure, cmu, ecl or sbcl: the corresponding Lisp
implementations being CLISP (\*:http://clisp.sf.net), Clozure CL
(\*:http://ccl.clozure.com), CMUCL (\*:http://cmucl.org), ECL
(\*:http://ecls.sf.net), and SBCL (\*:http://sbcl.sf.net).

If LISP is not
set, some default Lisp implementation is assumed.

For more information, please see the file INSTALL in the
distribution.

.SH SIMULATING TROFF OPTIONS

In contrast to troff2page's single argument, groff allows you to specify
on the command-line not just the input file but also various options for
additional information, e.g.,
-m to load macro files;
-r to pre-set number registers;
-d to pre-define strings;
-f to set default font family; etc. (See groff(1)
for details on all the provided options.)
The options can be usefully varied
with each call to groff.

For options that do not make sense for HTML -- e.g., the setting of
PO (adjusting the left margin to suit a particular printer) --, it is fine
that they cannot also be fed to troff2page.  For the options
that are valid for both print and HTML -- e.g., loading a macro
file that works for both output formats --, you
may need to add this information explicitly within the input document.
Thus, a -m command-line option would be replaced by an explicit call
to .mso within the document.

However, this will not be a workable approach for some options that do
not quite belong to the document, or that may potentially need to
be varied for the same document, when processed by different users or
in different environments, e.g., settings for registers like
GROWPS and PSINCR.  For such cases, you may place the
information in a troff macro file .troff2pagerc.tmac in your
home directory.  troff2page will load this file, if it exists,
before processing its argument file.

(Note that groff or troff
will not load .troff2pagerc.tmac automatically.  But that is
presumably OK, since you are using command-line options to specify the
same information anyway.  If you do want groff to pick up this file,
you can use the option -m.troff2pagerc.)

If the input file is recognizably a man page (i.e., it has the command
\&.TH), both troff2page and groff will load, if it exists, the init file
man.local in the home directory.

.SH COMMANDS

troff2page recognizes most of the commands (requests, macros,
diversions, strings, escapes, glyphs) of raw troff and its ms and man
macro packages. The syntax recognized is the improved kind supported by
groff (\*:http://groff.ffii.org) and Heirloom troff
(\*:http://heirloom.sf.net/doctools.html), i.e., macro, string, and glyph names
can be arbitrarily long, and strings can have arguments.  Most of the
commands are converted to their obvious HTML equivalent.  E.g., ms's
footnotes have a straightforward translation in the HTML, with the
footnote text set at the bottom of the HTML page, and with the footnote
markers in the body and the footnote hyperlinking to each other.  Please
consult troff and groff documentation for the commands.  We will
concentrate here on those commands whose HTML counterpart is not
immediately obvious.

.SH MACRO FILES

The troff2page distribution includes several macro files (aka tmac
files) with extension tmac,
viz., pca-*.tmac for various useful extensions;
eval4troff.tmac(7) for extending troff using Common Lisp; and
defhsl.tmac for defining color names using the HSL scheme.  You should
put these tmac files in one of your macro directories, i.e., the
directories that are searched by groff's -m option and .mso request.
(See groff_tmac(5), section FILES, for
details.  In a pinch, your home directory works as a macro directory.)

Note that it is best to load these tmac files into your document with
an .mso request rather than through groff's command-line option -m.
This is because troff2page doesn't support the same kind of command-line
arguments that groff does.

.SH AUXILIARY FILES

Many of the macros defined in these tmac files write
auxiliary files that are absorbed into the document during a
second run.  Note that in order to write these aux files,
groff must be run with the -U option for "unsafe"
mode.

As an example, consider troff2page.ms (the groff source for the
troff2page full manual).  The following is one
way to get the correct PostScript output:

    % groff -t -U -z troff2page.ms
    defhsl.tmac:8: can't open `.trofftemp_lisp_1.tmp' ...
    Rerun groff with -U
    troff2page.ms:187: can't open `.trofftemp.aux' ...
    troff2page.ms:799: can't open `.trofftemp.ind' ...

    % groff -t -U troff2page.ms > troff2page.ps

The -t option (which calls the tbl
preprocessor) is needed because the
document troff2page.ms
uses a table.  The first run uses the -z option to disable
writing an output file, which we don't need until the second
run.

In both runs, we use the -U option: The first run
needs unsafe mode to write the aux files, and the second run
needs it to process some of them with external programs to
create additional aux files.  Subsequent runs may dispense
with the -U, as all the required aux files are made.
(You will need the option again, if the aux files' content
changes.)

troff2page is also run twice on the document to absorb
information from the aux files.  However, troff2page doesn't
need any special option as it is always run in what groff
would consider "unsafe" mode, and it processes tables by
itself.

    % troff2page troff2page.ms
    Missing: (LAST-PAGE-NUMBER .troff2page_temp_troff2page.ind
    LISP-AUX-FILES .troff2page_temp_troff2page.aux
    TOC TITLE STYLESHEET)
    Rerun: troff2page troff2page.ms

    % troff2page troff2page.ms

The groff string \e*[AUXF] is used to construct the names of the
auxiliary files.  By default it will be quietly set to .trofftemp for
groff and something slightly different for troff2page.  You can change
it to anything else in your document before the first use of any macros
that use or write aux files.  It is a good idea to set it so that it
remains different for troff and troff2page, so that the two programs'
aux files don't clash.  The number register \en[.troff2page] suggests a
way to do this.

.SH PAGE LAYOUT

The page-break command .bp ends the current HTML page and start a new
one.  .bp causes a page-break in both the HTML and the print outputs.

Generally, page-breaks require a different aesthetic in HTML than in
print.  You can use troff conditionals to express this difference:

    .if \en[.troff2page] .bp

causes a page-break only in the HTML, whereas

    .if !\en[.troff2page] .bp

causes a page-break only in print.

As can be seen, the number register \en[.troff2page] has a true value,
i.e., a number greater than zero, only when troff2page processes the
document.  This number is in fact the version number of the troff2page
program processing the document.  It is a number such as 20050327, which
would be the version number of the troff2page released on 2005 March 27.
\en[.troff2page] could plausibly be used to distinguish not just
troff2page from troff, but also between various versions of troff2page.
Thus, one could, if the need were dire, write a document that translates
differently with different versions of troff2page.

If may be convenient to define a .HBP macro that causes a page-break
only for HTML:

    .de HBP
    .if \en[.troff2page] .bp
    ..

Note that troff2page, like troff, does not automatically cause a page break
at the sectioning commands.  Use .bp or a macro like .HBP to
explicitly to insert breaks as needed.

Each page in a multiple-page HTML output has a navigation bar at its
head and foot.  The bar contains links to the first, previous, and next
page, and the table-of-contents and index pages.  If any of these pages
doesn't exist, or if it is the same as the page containing the
navigation bar, then the link for it is disabled.

.SH HTML PARAGRAPHS

By default, troff2page sets paragraphs exactly as groff does: the first
lines of paragraphs are indented (unless explicitly disabled via an
\&.LP), and
the vertical distance between adjacent paragraphs is the same smallish
amount that groff employs.  These two values are given by the number
registers PI and PD, which (for the ms format) are 0.3n and 0.3v
respectively.

If you wish to have the kind of block paragraphs customary in HTML, it
is not enough to set PI to 0, for the prevailing value of PD is too
small to comfortably tell adjacent paragraphs apart.  You could set PD
to a larger value, but as a convenience, troff2page allows you to set PD
to a negative value, which leads to whatever default paragraph
separation that HTML uses.  Note that setting PD to a negative value
should be done only for HTML, as groff will happily overstrike
text in order to respect a negative PD:

    .if \en[.troff2page] \e{\e
    .nr PI 0n
    .nr PD 0-1p
    .\e}

.SH HTML PAGE WIDTH

Unlike groff ms, which uses the line length given by the register LL,
troff2page by default does not restrict the width of its HTML pages.
Text will narrow or widen to fit the current browser window width.  However, if
you explicitly set LL (instead of relying on ms's default), troff2page
will respect that line length.  Nevertheless, if the user shrinks the
browser window to a width less than LL, the text will correspondingly
shrink too to fit the window.  This is to avoid the need for horizontal
scrolling.

Note that a good LL value for troff2page should be a bit larger than
ms's 6 inches, which is too narrow for browser.  The following sets it
to 18 cm, making sure it takes effect only for HTML:

    .if \en[.troff2page] .nr LL 18c

.SH CROSS-REFERENCES

troff2page provides a .TAG macro for managing cross-references.
(This overrides the .TAG macro of groff's www.tmac, in order to
allow forward references.)

    .TAG sec:troffcl

associates the label TAG_sec:troffcl with the number of the
current page. The string \e*[TAG_sec:troffcl] is defined
to typeset as that page number. Thus, in a hand-crafted table of
contents, you could use

    Extending troff using Common Lisp, \e*[TAG_sec:troffcl]

In the HTML output, the string \e*[TAG_sec:troffcl] is not just a page
number but also a link to 
where .TAG sec:troffcl was called.

\&.TAG takes an optional second argument. The label is then
associated with the text of the second argument instead of the
current page number.

troff2page comes with the macro files pca-toc.tmac and
pca-sec.tmac that uses .TAG
to help generate a table-of-contents (ToC).

troff2page also comes with the macro file pca-t2p-man.tmac that
automatically generates a table of contents for man pages, with a toc entry for
each .SH in the input.

.SH MAKING AN INDEX

The supplied macro file pca-ix.tmac
creates a sorted
index, with the aid of the external program makeindex.
makeindex is included with TeX distributions, but you can
obtain just the makeindex distribution from
\*:http://stuff.mit.edu/afs/sipb/project/tex-dev/src/tar/makeindex.tar.gz.

Note that the indexes created by groff and troff2page are
necessarily different, because the respective paginations
are different.  In addition, the index generated for
troff2page has the additional feature of hyperlinking to the
appropriate locations in the body text.

The call

    .IX item

marks the text ``item'' as an indexable item.  The metacharacters @, !,
", and | can be used to respectively specify (a) alternate
alphabetization, (b) subitems, (c) literal metacharacters, and (d)
encapsulation of the page number.  Please see the makeindex
documentation (\*:http://tex.loria.fr/bibdex/makeindex.pdf) for all the details.
Essentially, the syntax for entering index entries is the same as for
LaTeX, except that in troff we use ``.IX item'' where in LaTeX one would
use \%``\eindex{item}''.

index.tmac will call makeindex to create a
sorted index in the auxiliary file \e*[AUXF].ind, which can be
slurped back into the input document:

    .so \e*[AUXF].ind

Adding a section header on top is up to you.

.SH SLIDESHOWS

To cause your troff source to be converted into slideshow-ready HTML,
have it source the provided macro file t2pslides.tmac.  This macro file
uses a version of the Mozpoint library (\*:http://mozpoint.mozdev.org)
to produce the appropriate JavaScript and style sheets to convert your
sequence of HTML pages into a Web presentation.

HTML pages meant for presentation use larger, bolder fonts, and do not have
navigation bars.

The following table describes the keys used to control the
presentation:

.TS
tab(#), center, allbox;
cb cb
l l.
Action # Effect
n, space, mouse-click # Next slide
p, backspace # Previous Slide
t, 0 # Title, or 0pening, slide
n (integer \(>= 0) # nth slide
b # toggle current slide with Black screen
w # toggle current slide with White screen
.TE

Note that the slides are numbered from 0 onward (rather than 1).  Also,
when typing a number n that's two or more digits long to get the nth
slide, the digits should be pressed fairly rapidly so they are
interpreted together.

.SH EXTENDING TROFF USING COMMON LISP

The groff macro file eval4troff.tmac(7) allows you to extend groff using
Common Lisp, i.e., Common Lisp code embedded in a groff document can be
used to affect how groff and troff2page process the document.

Please see eval4troff.tmac(7) for details.

.SH RECOVERY FROM ERRORS

If troff2page fails on your document, it will display a message giving its
best guess on what the problem is and where it occurred in the source
document, and will offer to take you there so you can fix it immediately.

    filename:lineno: error description
    Type e to edit file filename at line lineno; x to quit
    ?

In the first line, or the error diagnostic line,
filename is the particular source file (which need not be the
main document file) and lineno is the estimated number of the line in
that file that caused the error.  (This is a popular error-reporting format
and is exploited by text editors for helping the debugging process.)

In the second line, troff2page offers to fire up a text editor with the cursor
approximately close to the
offending line.

If you type e at the ? prompt, troff2page starts the editor specified in your
EDITOR environment variable, or if that is not set, the editor named
vi on your system.  troff2page calls the editor with two arguments:
the first argument is + followed by the line number, and the second
argument is the filename.
(This argument style works for all
vi and emacs clones and I suspect most modern editors take care
to recognize it, so it isn't as restrictive as it sounds.)

.SH AVAILABILITY

troff2page is downloadable from
\*:http://www.ccs.neu.edu/~dorai/troff2page/troff2page.html.

.SH SEE ALSO

groff(1), groff_tmac(5), groff_man(7), groff_ms(7),
eval4troff.tmac(7),
clisp(1), cmucl(1), ecl(1), lisp(1), sbcl(1)
